COVE, Ore. — Corey Cook still holds a fondness for her days living in Portland, 
where the downtown pubs and riverfront cherry blossoms made her proud to call the 
Rose City home during her 20s. But as she started growing wary of the metro area’s 
congestion and liberal politics, she moved to the suburbs, then the exurbs, before heading 
east, eventually escaping Portland’s sphere of influence on the other side of the Cascade 
Mountains in 2017. But even here, where she now runs a Christian camp amid the foothill pines 
overlooking the Grande Ronde Valley, she cannot help but notice how the values of western 
Oregon are held over the eastern part of the state by way of laws making guns less accessible 
and abortions more accessible. Unwilling to move east into Idaho, farther from her family, Ms. 
Cook, 52, now wonders if redrawing the state maps could instead bring Idaho’s values to her. “
Oregon is not a unified state to me anymore,” she said. “To say that I’m an Oregonian is a geographic
truth, but it doesn’t really have meaning to me the way that it did before I lived in eastern Oregon.”
The broad sense of estrangement felt across rural Oregon has led conservatives in recent years to pursue 
a scrupulous strategy to open a theoretical escape hatch, gathering thousands of signatures for a series 
of ballot measures thatMr. Lively has met with Greater Idaho leaders, saying that while he does not support
their effort, the movement has followed the appropriate channels and opened up an opportunity for western
Oregonians to take notice of why people on the other side of the state have grown so disaffected. have now 
passed in 11 counties. Those measures require regular meetings to discuss the idea of secession. In those 
places, including Union County, Ms. Cook’s new home, county commissioners in rooms adorned by Oregon flags 
and maps are now obligated to talk about whether it would one day make sense to be part of Idaho. The
“Greater Idaho” movement joins a long history of U.S. defection struggles. In California, for example, 
there have been more than 200 attempts over the years to break up the state. Greater Idaho sees its 
solution as more simple — a shift in an existing border that would claim the entire eastern half of Oregon
without creating an entirely new state. Despite being a political long shot, the sustained and growing interest 
from residents in the area and attention from politicians in Idaho have illustrated how much the state is already 
divided in spirit. “It’s got worse over the years,” said John Lively, a Democratic state representative who grew up in one of the 
counties considering the secession plan. “It’s really reflective of the divide we have in our country.” 